# What I use (2026)

I value technology with a minimal, well-thought user interface that you can quickly become productive with.
Configuration should be easy and non-hacky.

:::details

## Linux

I don't find the choice of Linux distribution very important.
Since I only use the terminal and browser, my workflow would be the same on any well-established distribution.
I have used Ubuntu for a long time and don't see any reason to change.
The only reason would probably be to try NixOS, but for now I have decided not to go down that rabbit hole.

:::

:::details

## Firefox

The browser is important, since it's the only application I use except for the terminal.
I've been using Firefox mainly for availablity of extensions.
I mostly need gh:philc/vimium and gh:opentyles/stylus to get a comfortable setup.
I need to turn on gh:darkreader/darkreader on some websites, but I'd like to stop using it,
since it seems to slow down the browser.
I love the styles from gh:catppuccin/userstyles that has ports to a lot of websites,
and I also have a generic one, as well as a couple of custom rules for fonts.

I would be interested in trying a more lightweight browser if I can have the same setup.

:::

:::details

## gh:ghostty-org/ghostty

After trying different terminal emulators, ghostty was the one that felt the most native and simplest to configure.

:::

:::details

## gh:subframe7536/Maple-font

I really value pretty code, so the font is important to me.
I have tried different fonts and really fell in love with this one.
Using the bold variant together with a light pastel theme (like [gh:catppuccin/catppuccin]{})
gives the code the attention and aesthetics I want.

:::

:::details

## fish

The choice of shell doesn't seem very important to me,
since most of my terminal workflow is based on CLI tools with shell integrations.
Fish just seems like the most modern choice these days,
and it has good enough autocompletion out of the box that I don't need a tool for that.
I also prefer fish's configuration over the other shells, although I still think it could be simpler.

:::

:::details

## Homebrew

Homebrew is basically what stops me from going down the Nix rabbit-hole.
Everything is available and always up-to-date, and
the ease of use is unmatched.
As a Homebrew user I think I could also be fine on MacOS (but I still prefer Linux).

:::

:::details

## neovim / LazyVim

When choosing an editor, the main contraints are:

- It must be a terminal editor.

  While I find gh:zed-industries/zed extremely attractive for its code collaboration features,
  I don't want another GUI application.
  I want to do all my work in the same environment as I run commands.
  I don't want any distracting menus.

- It must be easily and fully customizable.

  While I don't need an extreme level of cutomization with other tools,
  I really do with the editor.
  Static configuration files quickly become insufficient here,
  and I want a big ecosystem of plugins and documentation.
  That's why I couldn't use gh:helix-editor/helix,
  although I really like it for its simplicity and selection-first modal editing.

I didn't really like the idea of LazyVim because I prefer minimalism and adding the few features I need.
But building a decent configuration from nothing was a really overwhelming task,
one which I gave up on it several times,
and eventually it was LazyVim that made the witch to neovim possible.

Every now and then I dedicate some time to trying out some adjustments to the configuration,
whether it's a new keybinding or trying a new plugin.
I can alway get exactly what I want, because configuraation is such a core part of neovim.
But it's not something I'm forced to do in order to be productive or comfortable in the environment,
and I really appreciate LazyVim for that.
:::

:::details

## gh:gleam-lang/gleam

Gleam has by far become my favourite language.
It ha been by introduction to functional programming,
and functional programming has made me excited about programming again.

I wouldn't be able to write just a paragraph about Gleam,
so that will hopefully come in blog posts instead.

I'm also very excited about gh:lustre-labs/lustre,
which is an implementation of the Elm architecture in Gleam.

There are only a couple of things I'm motivated to learn about that Gleam doesn't give me;
managed effects and dependent types.
That doesn't mean I would like Gleam to have them though, as one of my main attractions to Gleam is how minimal it is.

:::

:::details

## opencode

Coding agents is not a topic I'm inspired to write blog posts about, so I will write once about it here.

One of my favorite things about LLM's is that I can stay in my terminal for things I would usually go to the browser for,
like quickly figuring out how to do something in the terminal, or researching a topic.

When working in a fun language like Gleam I usually find it stimulating to write out the code by hand,
but when I ocasionally find that too boring and want to move on to the next thing,
I like to delegate it to the agent.
For me there is no difference between the code I write by hand and the code I have descibed in natural language;
they both feel jut a much like my own code.

One thing I really like the coding agent for is configuration, especially of neovim, but also other tools.
I only find joy in the result (an environment that feels right),
but the process of configuring it myself would just cause me a lot of frustration and time (I'm both impatient and stubborn).
The fact that I can just describe exactly what I want and get it in less than a minute is really valuable to me.

Occasionally I also use it as a sparring partner.
I like to learn by asking and being asked questions, and I view the agent as a very cheap personal teacher.
But once I have got over the initial hurdle of learning something new,
I value finding high-quality human-made resources to solidify my knowledge.

To conclude, it's fair to say that the coding agent has become an integrated part of my workflow.
I don't think the result in any way; I would still make the same things in more or less the same time,
but it makes the way there more fun and ergonomic; and it helps me pass some initial hurdles
that I otherwise wouldn't have had the patience for.

I tried a few different coding agents and `opencode` is by far my favourite.
As far as I know it's the only coding agent with built in LSP support, which I think is a really good idea,
although it seems to not support coding actions, which I think would be very useful.
The configuration is both the simplest and most extensive.
The interface is nice and responsive, except the diffs which I wish were configurable, so I could ue something like difftastic.
And importantly, I never need any of the big, high-reasoning models; so I like that they focus on supporting small, efficient and open-source models.
It would be nice to run them locally one day.

:::

:::details

## difftastic

A good diff tool is an important part of my workflow,
since it allows me to review my changes and verify that I have done what I wanted.
Since difftastic is based on structural diffs,
it doesn't care if the file has been reformatted during the edit,
which I think is very useful.
It produces really pretty and clean diffs.

:::

:::details

## just

The idea of having a simple set of commands across all projects is really appealing to me.
The commands might trigger different things depending on the technology used in the project,
but only needing to remember a few simple commands like `just check` and `just test`
really simplifies my workflow.
That said, some technologies, like the Gleam programming language,
has such a nice CLI tool that I end up using it directly anyway.
But even then `just` can be useful if I'm working in a monorepo, for instance,
and I want to run commands across all the submodules.
Whenever I need to automate something in my workflow,
I know I can turn to `just`.
It's exactly as simple as a command runner should be.

:::

:::details

## zoxide

I like zoxide not only because it allows me `cd` into the folder i want in 3-4 keytrokes instead of 10-20,
but because I also need to think less.
I never spend time thinking about where in my file system I am anymore,
I just get to the folder I want by writing the first characters of its name.
Since there is a very limited set of folders I need to go to regularly, this becomes very automatic.

zoxide makes it pleasant to stay in the terminal, and makes me never want to open a file explorer again.

:::

:::details

## lean

I have only just started learning Lean, and I'm really fascinated by it, mostly because of its dependent type system.
The barrier of getting into it still feels high at the moment,
but I'm very motivated to learn how problems can be modeled with dependent types.
The editor support you can get also seems really cool.

:::

:::details

## pandoc

I really like the idea of a universal, format-independent AST for documents.
I think `pandoc` has proven the usefulness of this idea by being able to convert between literally any document formats,
in mot cases little with little to no loss of information, showing that Markdown and other formats are essentially
just different syntaxes for the same thing.
Yes, different flavors of Markdown offer syntaxes for very specific things, but I'm not a fan of that;
I don't want to depend on one opinionated technology for my writing.
I can express everything I want using the core syntax of any format (personally I like gh:jgm/djot),
and if I want to render some things in a special way I don't want that to be achieved through a specific syntax
(that might be outdated in some years),
but rather through a rule for how to render the AST (which will be stable).
That's what I try to achieve with gh:olavlan/pandi.

:::
